.\" Copyright 2002 Paul Thompson <set@pobox.com>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   udf-0.9.5 source
.\"
.\"
.TH CDRWTOOL 1 "udftools" "Commands"

.SH NAME
cdrwtool \- perform various actions on a CD-R, CD-RW, and DVD-R

.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "cdrwtool \-d " device " \-i | \-g"
.PP
.BI "cdrwtool \-d " device " \-s [ " write-parameters " ]"
.PP
.BI "cdrwtool \-d " device " \-q [ " write-parameters " ]"
.PP
.BI "cdrwtool \-d " device " \-m " offset " [ " write-parameters " ]"
.PP
.BI "cdwrtool \-d " device " \-u " blocks " [ " write-parameters " ]"
.PP
.BI "cdrwtool \-d " device " \-b " b_mode " [ " write-parameters " ]"
.PP
.BI "cdrwtool \-d " device " \-c " blocks " [ " write-parameters " ]"
.PP
.BI "cdwrtool \-d " device " \-f " filename " [ " write-parameters " ]"
.PP
.BI "cdwrtool \-d " device " \-r " track " [ " write-parameters " ]"
.PP
.BI "cdrwtool \-h"

.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBcdwrtool\fP command can perform certain actions on a CD-R,
CD-RW, or DVD-R device. Mainly these are blanking the media,
formatting it for use with the packet-cd device,  and applying an
UDF filesystem.
.PP
The most common usage is probably the `quick setup' option:
.IP
.BI "cdrwtool \-d " device " \-q"
.PP
which will blank the disc, format it as one large track, and
write the UDF filesystem structures.
.PP
Other options get and set various parameters of how the device is
set up, and provide for different offsets, modes and settings
from the defaults.
.PP
The usefulness of most of the options is not explained.

.SH OPTIONS
Main directives:
.IP "\fB\-d \fIdevice\fP"
Specify the device to use. eg. \fI/dev/sr0\fP

.IP \fB\-i\fP
Print disc track info.

.IP \fB\-g\fP
Print write parameters.

.IP "\fB\-u \fIlength\fP"
Make a UDF filesystem using \fIlength\fP number of blocks.

.IP "\fB\-q\fP"
`Quick setup': blank the disc, format it as one large track and write a UDF filesystem.

.IP "\fB\-m \fIoffset\fP"
Format the disc at \fIoffset\fP number of blocks.

.IP "\fB\-b \fImode\fP"
Blank the disk using a \fImode\fP of `full' or `fast'.

.IP "\fB\-f \fIfilename\fP"
Write file.

.IP "\fB\-c \fItrack\fP"
Close track.
.IP "\fB\-r \fItrack\fP"
Reserve track.

.IP "\fB\-z \fIlength\fP"
Fixed packet length.


.IP \fB\-s\fP
Set write parameters determined by
.BR "\-l" , " \-w" ", and" " \-p"
options for the disc.

.IP "\fB\-v \fIversion\fP"
Specify the udf revision to use. Valid revisions are 0x0201, 0x0200 and 0x0150.
If omitted,
.B mkudffs
udf-version is 0x0150.

.IP \fB\-h\fP
Prints a sparse help message.
.PP

Write parameters:
.IP "\fB\-t \fIspeed\fP"
Set write speed. (Defaults to 12x ?)
.IP "\fB\-l \fItype\fP"
Set multi\-session field. Either `0' (default), `1', or `3', corresponding to
`No B0 pointer. Next Session not allowed',
`B0 pointer = FF:FF:FF. Next session not allowed', and
`Next session allowed. B0 pointer = next possible program area' respectively.
.IP "\fB\-w \fImode\fP"
Set write mode. Either `mode1' or `mode2' (default).
.IP "\fB\-p \fItype\fP"
Set packet type. Either `0' or `1' (default), corresponding to
variable and fixed packet sizes respectively.
.IP "\fB\-o \fIoffset\fP"
Set write offset.

.SH AUTHORS
.nf
Jens Axboe <axboe@suse.de>
Ben Fennema
Some additions by Richard Atterer <atterer@debian.org>
.fi

.SH AVAILABILITY
.B cdrwtool
is part of the udftools package and is available from
https://github.com/pali/udftools/.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR pktsetup (8)
