'\" t -*- coding: UTF-8 -*-
.\" Copyright 2002 Paul Thompson <set@pobox.com>
.\" Copyright 2014-2018 Pali Rohár <pali.rohar@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
.\" 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
.\"
.TH MKUDFFS 8 "udftools" "System Management Commands"

.SH NAME
mkudffs \(en create an UDF filesystem

.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "mkudffs [ options ] " device " [ " blocks\-count " ] "

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBmkudffs\fP is used to create a UDF filesystem on a device (usually a disk). \
\fIdevice\fP is the special file corresponding to the device (e.g. \
\fI/dev/hdX\fP) or file image. \fIblocks\-count\fP is the number of blocks on
the device. If omitted, \fBmkudffs\fP automagically figures the filesystem
size. The order of options matters. Encoding option must be first and options to
override default settings implied by the media type or UDF revision should be
after the option they are overriding.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h,\-\-help
Display the usage and list of options.

.TP
.BI \-l,\-\-label= " label "
Specify the UDF label. UDF label is synonym for specifying both \fB\-\-lvid\fP
and \fB\-\-vid\fP options. If omitted, \fBmkudffs\fP label is \fILinuxUDF\fP. \
(Option available since mkudffs 1.1)

.TP
.BI \-u,\-\-uuid= " uuid "
Specify the UDF uuid. Must be exactly 16 hexadecimal lowercase digits and is
used for first 16 characters of \fB\-\-fullvsid\fP option. If omitted,
\fBmkudffs\fP uuid is generated from local time and random number. (Option
available since mkudffs 1.1)

.TP
.BI \-b,\-\-blocksize= " block\-size "
Specify the size of blocks in bytes. Valid block size for a UDF filesystem is
power of two in range from \fI512\fP to \fI32768\fP and must match a device
logical (sector) size. If omitted, \fBmkudffs\fP block size is set to device
logical block (sector) size. If logical block (sector) size is unknown (e.g. \
when creating disk image) then for \fB\-\-media\-type\fP=\fIhd\fP is used block
size \fI512\fP and for other media types \fI2048\fP.

.TP
.BI \-m,\-\-media\-type= " media\-type "
Specify the media type. Must be specified before \fB\-\-udfrev\fP. Valid media
types are:
.RS 1.2i
.TP 1.6i
.IR hd " (default)"
HD (Hard Disk)
.TP
.I worm
WORM (Write Once Read Many)
.TP
.I mo
MO (Magneto Optical)
.TP
.I cd
CD-ROM (CD Read-Only Memory)
.TP
.I cdr
CD-R (CD Recordable)
.TP
.I cdrw
CD-RW (CD Read-Write)
.TP
.I dvd
DVD-ROM (DVD Read-Only Memory)
.TP
.I dvdr
DVD-R (DVD Recordable)
.TP
.I dvdrw
DVD-RW (DVD Read-Write)
.TP
.I dvdram
DVD-RAM (DVD Random Access Memory)
.TP
.I bdr
BD-R (Blu-ray Disc Recordable)
.RE

.RS
(Short option variant \fB\-m\fP and values \fIcd\fP, \fIdvdr\fP, \fIbdr\fP are
available since mkudffs 2.0)
.RE

.TP
.BI \-r,\-\-udfrev= " udf\-revision "
Specify the UDF revision to use, either in hexadecimal (e.g. \fI0x0201\fP) or
decimal (e.g. \fI2.01\fP) format. Valid revisions are \fI1.02\fP, \fI1.50\fP,
\fI2.00\fP, \fI2.01\fP, \fI2.50\fP and \fI2.60\fP. If omitted, \fBmkudffs\fP UDF
revision is \fI2.01\fP, except for Blu-ray Discs which is \fI2.50\fP. UDF
revisions higher then \fI2.01\fP are experimental. Option must be specified
after \fB\-\-media\-type\fP. (Values in decimal format and revisions higher then
\fI2.01\fP are supported since mkudffs 2.0)

.TP
.B \-n,\-\-no\-write
Not really, do not write to \fIdevice\fP. Just simulate and display what would
happen with \fIdevice\fP. Useful for determining calculated location of
different UDF blocks. (Option available since mkudffs 2.0)

.TP
.B \-\-new\-file
Create a new image file specified by \fIdevice\fP with \fIblocks\-count\fP and
fail if file already exists. If omitted, \fBmkudffs\fP creates a new image file
only in case it does not exist yet. (Option available since mkudffs 2.0)

.TP
.BI \-\-lvid= " logical\-volume\-identifier "
Specify the \fILogical Volume Identifier\fP. If omitted, \fBmkudffs\fP Logical
Volume Identifier is \fILinuxUDF\fP. Most UDF implementations uses this
identifier as a disk label.

.TP
.BI \-\-vid= " volume\-identifier "
Specify the \fIVolume Identifier\fP. If omitted, \fBmkudffs\fP Volume Identifier
is \fILinuxUDF\fP.

.TP
.BI \-\-vsid= " volume\-set\-identifier "
Specify the 17.\(en127. character of \fIVolume Set Identifier\fP. If omitted,
\fBmkudffs\fP Volume Set Identifier is \fILinuxUDF\fP.

.TP
.BI \-\-fsid= " file\-set\-identifier "
Specify the \fIFile Set Identifier\fP. If omitted, \fBmkudffs\fP File Set
Identifier is \fILinuxUDF\fP.

.TP
.BI \-\-fullvsid= " full\-volume\-set\-identifier "
Specify the full \fIVolume Set Identifier\fP. Overwrite previous \fB\-\-uuid\fP
and \fB\-\-vsid\fP options. (Option available since mkudffs 1.1)

.TP
.BI \-\-uid= " uid "
Specify the uid of the root (/) directory. If omitted, \fBmkudffs\fP uid is
\fI0\fP. Special value \fI\-1\fP means invalid or not specified uid. (Option
available since mkudffs 1.1)

.TP
.BI \-\-gid= " gid "
Specify the gid of the root (/) directory. If omitted, \fBmkudffs\fP gid is
\fI0\fP. Special value \fI\-1\fP means invalid or not specified gid. (Option
available since mkudffs 1.1)

.TP
.BI \-\-mode= " mode "
Specify permissions in octal mode bits of the root (/) directory. If omitted,
\fBmkudffs\fP mode is \fI0755\fP. (Option available since mkudffs 2.0)

.TP
.BI \-\-bootarea= " fill "
Specify how to fill UDF boot area which is first 32kB of disk and is not used by
UDF itself. Option \fImbr\fP make sense only when running \fBmkudffs\fP on whole
disk, not on just one partition. Valid options are:
.RS 1.2i
.TP 1.4i
.I preserve
preserve existing UDF boot area, do not touch it (default for media type
different from \fIhd\fP)
.TP
.I erase
erase existing UDF boot area, fill it by zeros (default for \fIhd\fP media type
on partitions and on removable disks)
.TP
.I mbr
put MBR table with one partition which starts at sector 0 (includes MBR itself)
and spans whole disk device, needed only for non-removable hard disks used on
Microsoft Windows systems (default for \fIhd\fP media type on non-removable hard
disk without partitions), see section \fBWHOLE DISK VS PARTITION\fP
.RE

.RS
(Option available since mkudffs 2.0)
.RE

.TP
.BI \-\-strategy= " strategy "
Specify the allocation strategy to use. Valid strategies are \fI4\fP and
\fI4096\fP. If omitted, \fBmkudffs\fP strategy is based on the
\fB\-\-media\-type\fP.

.TP
.BI \-\-spartable,\ \-\-spartable= " spartable\-number "
Enable usage Sparing Table. Optionally specify also the number of sparing
tables. Valid numbers are \fI1\(en4\fP. When spartable number is omitted then
two tables are written to disc. If option is omitted then usage of Sparing Table
depends on media type. (Option prior to mkudffs 2.0 was available only for
\fIcdrw\fP media type)

.TP
.BI \-\-sparspace= " num\-of\-entires "
Specify the number of entries in Sparing Table. If omitted, default number of
entries is \fI1024\fP, but depends on media type. (Option available since
mkudffs 2.0)

.TP
.BI \-\-packetlen= " length "
Packet length in number of blocks used for alignment. All continuous UDF
structures would be aligned to packets. It specify also size of the Sparing
Space and packet length in Sparing Table. It should match device ECC/packet
length. If omitted, default value for DVD discs is \fI16\fP blocks, for CD/BD
discs it is \fI32\fP blocks and otherwise \fI1\fP block. (Option prior to
mkudffs 2.1 was available only for \fIcdrw\fP and \fIdvdrw\fP media types)

.TP
.B \-\-vat
Enable usage of Virtual Allocation Table (VAT). If omitted, usage depends on
media type. (Option available since mkudffs 2.0)

.TP
.B \-\-closed
Close disc with Virtual Allocation Table. AVDP is written also to the end of
disc. By default disc with Virtual Allocation Table is not closed.

.TP
.BI \-\-space= " space "
Specify the Space Set. \fIUnallocated\fP Space Set is used for media which
blocks may be allocated immediately. \fIFreed\fP Space Set is used for media
which blocks needs to be specially prepared/erased before allocation. In Space
\fITable\fP is stored list of unallocated extents. In Space \fIBitmap\fP is
stored bitmap of unallocated blocks. Not used for VAT.
.RS 1.2i
.TP 1.6i
.I freedbitmap
Freed Bitmap
.TP
.I freedtable
Freed Table
.TP
.I unallocbitmap
Unallocated Bitmap (default)
.TP
.I unalloctable
Unallocated Table
.RE

.TP
.BI \-\-ad= " ad "
Specify the Allocation Descriptors of the root (/) directory.
.RS 1.2i
.TP 1.6i
.I inicb
Allocation Descriptors in ICB (default)
.TP
.I short
Short Allocation Descriptors
.TP
.I long
Long Allocation Descriptors
.RE

.TP
.B \-\-noefe
Don't Use Extended File Entries for the root (/) directory. Affects only UDF
2.00 or higher. Must be specified after \fB\-\-udfrev\fP.

.TP
.B \-\-locale
Treat identifier string options as strings encoded according to current locale
settings (default). Must be specified as first argument. (Option available since
mkudffs 2.0)

.TP
.B \-\-u8
Treat identifier string options as strings encoded in 8-bit OSTA Compressed
Unicode format, equivalent to Latin1 (ISO-8859-1). Must be specified as first
argument.

.TP
.B \-\-u16
Treat identifier string options as strings encoded in 16-bit OSTA Compressed
Unicode format, equivalent to UCS-2BE. Note that it is not possible to include
zero byte in command line options, therefore any character which has at least
one zero byte cannot be supplied (this applies to all Latin1 characters). Must
be specified as first argument.

.TP
.B \-\-utf8
Treat identifier string options as strings encoded in UTF-8. Must be specified
as first argument.

.SH COMPATIBILITY

.SS "OPERATING SYSTEMS SUPPORT"
UDF filesystem is natively supported by large amount of operating systems. See
following compatibility table:

.TS
box;
c s|c s
c|c|c|c
l|l|c|c.
Operating system	Maximum UDF revision for
_
Name	Version	read	write
=
Linux	2.3.17 \(en 2.4.5	2.00	2.00
\^	2.4.6 \(en 2.6.25	2.01	2.01
\^	2.6.26 (and new)	2.50	2.01
_
Windows	98/Me	1.02	none
\^	2000	1.50	none
\^	XP	2.01	none
\^	Vista (and new)	2.60	2.50
_
Mac OS	8.1 \(en 8.5	1.02	none
\^	8.6 \(en 9.2	1.50	1.50
_
Mac OS X	10.0 \(en 10.3	1.50	1.50
\^	10.4	2.01	2.01
\^	10.5 (and new)	2.60	2.50
_
FreeBSD	5 (and new)	1.50	none
_
NetBSD	4.0	2.60	none
\^	5.0 (and new)	2.60	2.60
_
OpenBSD	3.8 \(en 3.9	1.02	none
\^	4.0 \(en 4.6	1.50	\^
\^	4.7 (and new)	2.60	\^
_
Solaris	7 (and new)	1.50	1.50
_
AIX	5.2 (and new)	2.01	2.01
.TE

Note that Windows 98 and Windows Me can read UDF filesystem only from CD and DVD
optical discs, not from hard disks.

.SS "BLOCK SIZE"
In most cases operating systems are unable to mount UDF filesystem if UDF block
size differs from logical sector size of device. Typically hard disks have
sector size 512 bytes and optical media 2048 bytes. Therefore UDF block size
must match logical sector size of device.

Linux kernel prior to version 2.6.30 used hardcoded UDF block size of 2048 bytes
independently of logical sector size, therefore it was not able to automatically
mount UDF filesystem if block size differed from 2048. Since 2.6.30 and prior to
4.11 Linux kernel used logical sector size of device as UDF block size, plus it
tried fallback to 2048. Since 4.11 it uses logical sector size and fallbacks to
any valid block size between logical sector size and 4096. Therefore since
version 2.6.30 Linux kernel can automatically mount UDF filesystems correctly if
UDF block size matches device logical sector size and since version 4.11 can
automatically also mount devices which sector size does not match UDF block
size. In any case and also for Linux kernel prior to version 2.6.30, different
UDF block size (which is not autodetected) can be manually specified via
\fBbs\fP=\fIblocksize\fP mount parameter.

.SS "WHOLE DISK VS PARTITION"
UDF filesystem is supposed to be formatted on the whole media and not to the
partitioned hard disk. Mac OS X systems enforce this rule and reject to
automatically mount UDF filesystem unless it is formatted on the whole
unpartitioned hard disk. Possible partition table (e.g. MBR or GPT) on disk with
valid UDF filesystem is ignored. On the other hand Microsoft Windows systems are
unable to detect non-removable hard disks without MBR or GPT partition table.
Removable disks do not have this restriction. Consequence is that non-removable
hard disks formatted to UDF by Windows Vista+ are not recognized by Mac OS X
systems and vice-versa. Note that manual mount of UDF partition on partitioned
hard disk on Mac OS X system is possible and working (e.g. by running commands
\fCmkdir /Volumes/DriveName && mount_udf /dev/disk1s1 /Volumes/DriveName\fP). \
But there is no known way to mount unpartitioned non-removable disk on Windows
system.

Thanks to reserved and unused UDF boot area (first 32kB of UDF filesystem) it is
possible to deal with this problem, by putting MBR on such non-removable hard
disk just for compatibility reasons with Windows. Such MBR table would contain
one partition which starts at sector 0 (includes MBR itself) and span whole disk
device. So the whole disk device and also first partition on disk points to same
sectors. Therefore UDF filesystem can be mounted either from whole disk device
(needed for Mac OS X systems) or from first partition (needed for Microsoft
Windows systems).

Linux kernel ignores MBR table if contains partition which starts at sector 0. \
Normally Linux kernel can detect and mount UDF filesystem either on partition or
on whole disk device. It does not have any restrictions.

\fBmkudffs\fP option \fB\-\-bootarea\fP=\fImbr\fP put such MBR table for
compatibility with Microsoft Windows systems into disk when formatting.

.SS "LINUX LABEL BUGS"
In most cases \fILogical Volume Identifier\fP is used as UDF label. But Linux
libblkid prior to version 2.26 used \fIVolume Identifier\fP. Therefore
\fBmkudffs\fP \fB\-\-label\fP for compatibility reasons set both \fILogical
Volume Identifier\fP and \fIVolume Identifier\fP.

Linux libblkid prior to version 2.30 incorrectly processed non-ASCII identifier
strings encoded in 8-bit OSTA Compressed Unicode format. Therefore \fBmkudffs\fP
since version 2.0 for compatibility reasons tries to encode non-ASCII identifier
strings in 16-bit OSTA Compressed Unicode format and then fallbacks to 8-bit
format.

For more information about UDF Label and UUID see \fBudflabel\fP(8) section
\fBUDF LABEL AND UUID\fP.

.SH "EXIT STATUS"
\fBmkudffs\fP returns 0 if successful, non-zero if there are problems.

.SH LIMITATIONS
\fBmkudffs\fP cannot create UDF 2.50 Metadata partition, therefore it does not
support UDF revisions higher then 2.01 for non Write Once media yet. So there is
no support for Blu-ray discs which needs UDF 2.50 (except for Blu-ray Disc
Recordable which does not require Metadata partition).

.SH BUGS
\fBmkudffs\fP prior to version 1.1 was unable to process non-ASCII characters
from identifier strings in \fB\-\-utf8\fP mode, \fB\-\-vsid\fP option was
completely broken and \fB\-\-blocksize\fP must have been manually specified for
hard disks as default value was hardcoded for optical disks. \fBmkudffs\fP prior
to version 2.0 generated broken and unreadable \fIcdr\fP disc images.

.SH AUTHOR
.nf
Ben Fennema <bfennema@falcon.csc.calpoly.edu>
Pali Rohár <pali.rohar@gmail.com>
.fi

.SH AVAILABILITY
\fBmkudffs\fP is part of the udftools package and is available from
https://github.com/pali/udftools/.

.SH SEE ALSO
\fBpktsetup\fP(8), \fBudflabel\fP(8), \fBcdrwtool\fP(1), \fBudfinfo\fP(1),
\fBwrudf\fP(1)
