.\" Copyright 2002 Paul Thompson <set@pobox.com>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111,
.\" USA.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"     losetup.8
.\"	udftools src
.\"
.TH PKTSETUP 8 "udftools" "System Management Commands"

.SH NAME
pktsetup \- set up and tear down packet device associations

.SH SYNOPSIS
.ad l
.B pktsetup
.I packet_device block_device
.br
.B pktsetup
.B \-d
.I packet_device
.br
.B pktsetup
.B \-s
.ad b
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Pktsetup
is used to associate packet devices with CD or DVD block devices,
so that the packet device can then be mounted and potentially
used as a read/write filesystem. This requires kernel support for
the packet device, and the UDF filesystem.
.PP
See: HOWTO.udf (in the udftools documents directory)

.SH EXIT STATUS
.B Pktsetup
returns 0 on success, nonzero on failure.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP "\fB\-d \fIpacket-device\fP"
Delete the association between the specified \fIpacket-device\fP
and its block device.

.IP "\fB\-s\fP"
Show the current device mapping, one device per line, in the format
 \fIname\fP : \fIpktdevid\fP -> \fIblkdevid\fP
.br
(e.g. "0 : 253:0 -> 22:0")

.SH EXAMPLE
The following commands provide an example of using the
packet device.
.nf
.IP
cdrwtool \-d /dev/sr0 \-q
pktsetup 0 /dev/sr0

mount \-t udf /dev/pktcdvd0 /mnt
 ...
umount /dev/pktcdvd0
pktsetup \-d 0
.fi
.LP

.SH FILES
.nf
/dev/pktcdvd0,/dev/pktcdvd1,...  CD/DVD packet devices
.fi

.SH AUTHOR
.nf
Jens Axboe <axboe@suse.de>
Some additions by Richard Atterer <atterer@debian.org>
.fi

.SH AVAILABILITY
.B pktsetup
is part of the udftools package and is available from
https://github.com/pali/udftools/.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR cdrwtool (1)
