.\" Copyright 2017 Vojtech Vladyka <vojtech.vladyka@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
.\" License along with this manual; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, 
.\" Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
.\"
.\" References consulted:
.\"   
.\"
.\"
.TH UDFFSCK 8 "May 2017" "UDFTOOLS 1.3"
.SH NAME
udffsck \- check and correction for UDF filesystem
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B udffsck
[\fB\-vvvcipCh\fR]
[\fB\-B\fR \fIBLOCKSIZE\fR]
.IR medium
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B udffsck
is used to check and correct UDF file systems.
There are known limitations regarding UDF version, which is now limited to 2.01 or older.
.PP
.I medium 
is the device file where file system is stored (e.g. 
.IR /dev/sda1 ).
.PP
Please note it is not safe run
.B udffsck 
on mounted file system.
Even if you think it is safe to run it on mounted file system, whole report is invalid.
You should never never make any changes on mounted file system, so if
.B udffsck 
asks to do so, only valid answer is ,,no'', otherwise you can break your filesystem instead.
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-B " " \fIBLOCKSIZE\fR
Force udffsck to use this blocksize instead of autodetection.
This value is in bytes.
Default is autodetected value by finding VRS and AVDP positions.
.TP
.BR \-c
Only check medium and print found errors.
This is default behavior.
.TP
.BR \-C
Coloring output with ASCII color code.
.TP
.BR \-i
Interactively fix medium. 
In this mode all corrections must be authorized by user.
.TP
.BR \-p
Automatical corrections. This is like 
.BR -i , 
but all questions are answered yes.
.TP
.BR \-h 
Short help message.
.TP
.BR \-v 
Warning verbosity level. 
Errors and warning will be printed.
.TP
.BR \-vv 
Message verbosity level. 
Errors, warnings and messages will be printed. 
Recomended for manual usage.
.TP
.BR \-vvv
Debug Verbosity level. 
Only for development and debug purposes. 
And for nosy users.
.SH EXIT CODE
The exit code returned by
.B udffsck
is the sum of the following conditions:
.br
\       0\      \-\ No errors
.br
\       1\      \-\ File system errors corrected
.br
\       2\      \-\ File system errors corrected, system should
.br
\       \       \ \ be rebooted (not used at this moment)
.br
\       4\      \-\ File system errors left uncorrected
.br
\       8\      \-\ Operational error
.br
\       16\     \-\ Usage or syntax error
.br
\       32\     \-\ udffsck canceled by user request
.br
\       128\    \-\ Shared library error (not used at this moment)
.br
.SH EXAMPLES
Check medium and show it structure to user:
.PP
.nf
.RS
udffsck -vvc /dev/sda2 
.RE
.fi
.PP
Check and fix medium image automatically, show only errors:
.PP
.nf
.RS
udffsck -p udf_image_file.img 
.RE
.fi
.PP
.SH BUGS
Reading and correcting is supported on UDF filesystems up to version 2.01.
More recent filesystems are not currently covered and
.B udffsck
will end with exit code 8. 
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Almost any piece of software will have bugs.
If you manage to find a filesystem which causes
.B udffsck
to crash, or which 
.B udffsck
is unable to  repair,  please report it to the author.
.PP
Please include as much information as possible in bug report.
It helps to analyze bug and hopefuly fix it.
.PP
Necessary information in bug report are 
.B udffsck
version (obtainable by -h option) and OS information (uname -a).
Also if possible attach compressed medium image which made 
.B udffsck
fail and complete log from stdout and stderr at debug verbosity (obtainable by -vvv option).
.SH AUTHOR
This version of 
.B udffsck 
was written by Vojtech Vladyka <vojtech.vladyka@gmail.com>
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR cdrwtool (1),
.BR fsck (8),
.BR mkudfs (8),
.BR pktsetup (8),
.BR wrudf (8)
