'\" t -*- coding: UTF-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 2017-2019  Pali Rohár <pali.rohar@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
.\" 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
.\"
.TH UDFINFO 1 "udftools" "Commands"

.SH NAME
udfinfo \(em show information about UDF filesystem

.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "udfinfo [ options ] " device

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBudfinfo\fP shows various information about a UDF filesystem stored either on
the block device or in the disk file image. The output from the \fBudfinfo\fP is
suitable for parsing by external applications or scripts.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h,\-\-help
Display the usage and the list of options.

.TP
.BI \-b,\-\-blocksize= " block\-size "
Specify the size of blocks in bytes. Valid block size for a UDF filesystem is
a power of two in the range from \fI512\fP to \fI32768\fP and must match a
device logical (sector) size. If omitted, \fBudfinfo\fP tries to autodetect
block size. First it tries logical (sector) size and then all valid block sizes.

.TP
.BI \-\-startblock= " start\-block "
Specify the block location where the UDF filesystem starts. It is used for
calculating the block location of the Volume Recognition Sequence (32 kB after
the start block) and the first Anchor Volume Descriptor Pointer (256 blocks
after the start block).

Normally start block is \fI0\fP, but for Multisession UDF optical discs it is
the block location where the last session of Multisession UDF disc starts.

If omitted, \fBudfinfo\fP for optical disc tries to detect start block of the
last session from disc Table Of Contents. Otherwise value \fI0\fP is used.

For accessing some previous session of Multisession UDF optical disc, it is
required to specify correct block where that previous session starts. And also
to specify where that session ends via \fB\-\-lastblock\fP option.

For Multisession UDF disc images stored in file there is no way to detect where
the last session starts and therefore it is necessary to specify the correct
start block location manually from the original optical disc Table Of Contents.

(Option available since udfinfo 2.3)

.TP
.BI \-\-lastblock= " last\-block "
Specify the block location where the UDF filesystem ends. It is used for
calculating the block location of second and third Anchor Volume Descriptor
Pointer (256 blocks prior the last block and the last block itself).

Normally last block is \fInumber of disk blocks minus one\fP, but for
Multisession UDF optical discs when reading different session than the last one
(specified by \fB\-\-startblock\fP) it is the block location where the specified
session ends.

If omitted, \fBudfinfo\fP for optical disc tried to detect the last recorded
block with fallback to the last block of device or disk file image.

For accessing some previous session of Multisession UDF optical disc, it is
required to specify correct value for both \fB\-\-startblock\fP and
\fB\-\-lastblock\fP options.

(Option available since udfinfo 2.3)

.TP
.BI \-\-vatblock= " vat\-block "
Specify the block location of the Virtual Allocation Table. Virtual Allocation
Table is present only on UDF disks with Virtual Partition Map and must be at the
last written/recorded disk block.

If omitted, \fBudfinfo\fP for optical disc tries to detect the last recorded
block with fallback to the last block of block device or disk file image or
block specified by \fB\-\-lastblock\fP. In most cases, this fallback does not
have to work and for disk file images with Virtual Allocation Table it is
necessary to specify the correct location.

Virtual Allocation Table contains locations of UDF disk blocks needed to read
data storage, determinate used and free space blocks, read File Set Identifier
and calculate Windows-specific Volume Serial Number. Also, it contains Logical
Volume Identifier and overwrite previously stored in Logical Volume Descriptor.

.TP
.B \-\-locale
Encode UDF string identifiers on output according to current locale settings
(default).

.TP
.B \-\-u8
Encode UDF string identifiers on output to 8-bit OSTA Compressed Unicode format
without leading Compression ID byte, which is equivalent to Latin1 (ISO-8859-1)
encoding. This will work only for strings which all Unicode code points are
below U+100.

.TP
.B \-\-u16
Encode UDF string identifiers on output to 16-bit OSTA Compressed Unicode
format without leading Compression ID byte, which is equivalent to UTF-16BE.

.TP
.B \-\-utf8
Encode UDF string identifiers on output to UTF-8.

.SH "EXIT STATUS"
\fBudfinfo\fP returns 0 if successful, non-zero if there are problems like a
block device does not contain UDF filesystem.

.SH "OUTPUT FORMAT"
First part of the \fBudfinfo\fP standard output contains information in
\fIkey\fP=\fIvalue\fP format. List of all keys with their meaning are in the
following table:

.RS
.TP 1.7i
.I filename
File name of the selected block device or disk file image
.TP
.I label
label is an alias for \fIlvid\fP, see \fBudflabel\fP(8) section
\fBUDF LABEL AND UUID\fP
.TP
.I uuid
UUID are first 16 hexadecimal lowercase digits of \fIfullvsid\fP, but see
\fBudflabel\fP(8) section \fBUDF LABEL AND UUID\fP
.TP
.I lvid
UDF Logical Volume Identifier stored in UDF Logical Volume Descriptor
.TP
.I vid
UDF Volume Identifier stored in UDF Primary Volume Descriptor
.TP
.I vsid
\fIfullvsid\fP after \fIuuid\fP part, typically 17.\(en127. character
.TP
.I fsid
UDF File Set Identifier stored in UDF File Set Descriptor
.TP
.I fullvsid
UDF Volume Set Identifier stored in UDF Primary Volume Descriptor
.TP
.I winserialnum
Windows-specific Volume Serial Number
.TP
.I blocksize
UDF block size
.TP
.I blocks
Number of all blocks on the selected block device or disk file image
.TP
.I usedblocks
Number of used space blocks on UDF disk for data storage
.TP
.I freeblocks
Number of free space blocks on UDF disk for data storage
.TP
.I behindblocks
Number of blocks which are behind the last block used by UDF disk
.TP
.I numfiles
Number of stored files on UDF disk
.TP
.I numdirs
Number of stored directories on UDF disk
.TP
.I udfrev
UDF revision needed for reading UDF disk
.TP
.I udfwriterev
UDF revision needed for writing or modifying UDF disk
.TP
.I startblock
Block location where the UDF filesystem starts (visible only when non-zero,
available since udfinfo 2.3)
.TP
.I lastblock
Block location where the UDF filesystem ends (visible only when it is not same
as the last block on disk, available since udfinfo 2.3)
.TP
.I vatblock
Block location of the UDF Virtual Allocation Table (visible only when available)
.TP
.I integrity
UDF integrity of Logical Volume, one of: \fIopened\fP, \fIclosed\fP,
\fIunknown\fP
.TP
.I accesstype
UDF Access Type, one of: \fIoverwritable\fP, \fIrewritable\fP, \fIwriteonce\fP,
\fIreadonly\fP, \fIpseudo\-overwritable\fP, \fIunknown\fP
.TP
.I softwriteprotect
Status of UDF SoftWriteProtect flag, either \fIyes\fP or \fIno\fP
(available since udfinfo 2.2)
.TP
.I hardwriteprotect
Status of UDF HardWriteProtect flag, either \fIyes\fP or \fIno\fP
(available since udfinfo 2.2)
.RE

When UDF integrity is not \fIclosed\fP it means that the UDF disk was not
properly unmounted, is in an inconsistent state and needs repairing.

When either \fIsoftwriteprotect\fP or \fIhardwriteprotect\fP flag is set then
UDF disk should be treated as read-only.

All UDF string identifiers are stored on UDF disk in Unicode, therefore they are
locale or code page agnostic. Options \fB\-\-locale\fP, \fB\-\-u8\fP,
\fB\-\-u16\fP and \fB\-\-utf8\fP controls how are identifiers encoded on output.

All newline characters from the UDF string identifiers are removed, so it is
guaranteed that the newline character is present only as a separator.

Second part of the \fBudfinfo\fP standard output contains list of UDF block
types stored on device, one per line in the following format:

.RS
start=\fIblock\-num\fP, blocks=\fIblock\-count\fP, type=\fIblock\-type\fP
.RE

With meaning that \fIblock\-type\fP starts at UDF block \fIblock\-num\fP and
span \fIblock\-count\fP blocks on device.

Windows-specific \fIVolume Serial Number\fP is a non-standard 32-bit checksum,
calculated as four separate 8-bit XOR checksums of 512 bytes long UDF File Set
Descriptor. Therefore, it cannot be set or changed as opposed to UUID which is
64-bit long. This non-standard checksum is used only by Windows systems
(since Windows 98 era when it was introduced) and can be displayed on Windows
systems by applications like \fBvol\fP, \fBdir\fP or \fBfsutil.exe\fP.

.SH LIMITATIONS
\fBudfinfo\fP prior to version 2.3 was unable to handle Multisession UDF discs
correctly. It always printed only information about the first session (the
oldest one) and not about the last session (the most recent).

\fBudfinfo\fP prior to version 2.2 was unable to print Unicode strings with
code points above U+FFFF correctly.

\fBudfinfo\fP prior to version 2.2 was unable to read Metadata Partition. \
Therefore, determining used and free space blocks, reading File Set Identifier
and calculating Windows-specific Volume Serial Number did not have to be
available or correctly calculated for disks with UDF revisions higher than 2.01
which had Metadata Partition.

\fBudfinfo\fP prior to version 2.1 was unable to read Virtual Allocation Table
stored outside of Information Control Block. Therefore above limitation applied
also for some Write Once media.

.SH AUTHOR
.nf
Pali Rohár <pali.rohar@gmail.com>
.fi

.SH AVAILABILITY
\fBudfinfo\fP is part of the udftools package since version 2.0 and is available
from https://github.com/pali/udftools/.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBmkudffs\fP(8), \fBpktsetup\fP(8), \fBudflabel\fP(8), \fBcdrwtool\fP(1),
\fBwrudf\fP(1)
