'\" t -*- coding: UTF-8 -*-
.\" Copyright (C) 2017-2021  Pali Rohár <pali.rohar@gmail.com>
.\" Copyright (C) 2023  Johannes Truschnigg <johannes@truschnigg.info>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
.\" 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
.\"
.TH UDFTUNE 8 "udftools" "Commands"

.SH NAME
udftune \(em modify UDF filesystem characteristics

.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "udftune [block\-options] [filesystem\-options] " device

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBudftune\fP is a UDF-specific utility to modify various aspects of filesystem
metadata, in the spirit of \fBtune2fs\fP(8) and similar tools for other
filesystems.  Its current implementation can mark an existing UDF device/image
read-only, or to reverse that and mark it read-write.

.SH OPTIONS

.SS "GENERAL OPTIONS"
.TP
.B \-h,\-\-help
Display the usage and the list of options.

.SS "BLOCK OPTIONS"
.TP
.BI \-b,\-\-blocksize= " block\-size "

.TP
.BI \-\-startblock= " start\-block "

.TP
.BI \-\-lastblock= " last\-block "

.TP
.BI \-\-vatblock= " vat\-block "

.TP
.B \-\-force

.TP
.B \-n,\-\-no\-write

For a comprehensive overview of the block-related options listed above, please
refer to \fBudflabel\fP(8).

.SS "FILESYSTEM OPTIONS"
.TP
.BI \-\-mark-ro
Mark the UDF filesystem on \fIdevice\fP ro (read-only) in its FSD and LVD.

.TP
.BI \-\-mark-rw
Mark the UDF filesystem on \fIdevice\fP rw (read+write) in its FSD and LVD.

.SH "EXIT STATUS"
\fBudftune\fP returns 0 if successful, non-zero if there are problems like
if the block device does not contain a UDF filesystem, or updating failed.

.SH AUTHOR
.nf
Johannes Truschnigg <johannes@truschnigg.info>
Pali Rohár <pali.rohar@gmail.com>
.fi

.SH AVAILABILITY
\fBudftune\fP is part of the udftools package since after version 2.3 and is
available from https://github.com/pali/udftools/.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBmkudffs\fP(8), \fBpktsetup\fP(8), \fBcdrwtool\fP(1), \fBudfinfo\fP(1),
\fBwrudf\fP(1)
